In this lecture, you'll learn about a basic initial configuration to put on your routers and switches.
One of the first things it will do is configure IP addresses. Your routers provide connectivity
between your different IP subnets.
That's their main job.
So the routers need to have interfaces in the different subnets, and they need to have IP addresses on
those interfaces.
Those IP addresses will act as the default gateway address for any hosts that are in that subnet.
The command to put an IP address on an interface,
first off, go to the interface. So you see an example here, we've got a router down at the bottom, interface
FastEthernet0/0 on the right has got IP address 192.168.0.1/24, and the interface
on the left, FastEthernet0/1, has got IP address 192.168.1.1
/24.
Obviously, the IP addresses need to be in different subnets that are on different interfaces. The command
to do this from global configuration mode,
we then go to interface configuration mode.
So the command is 'interface FastEthernet0/0', then to put the IP address on there, 'ip address',
space,
'192.168.0.1', and then another space, and then the 'subnet mask 255.255.255.0'. The IP
address and the subnet mask are both entered with one command, and you have to enter the subnet mask in
full dotted decimal notation.
You can't enter /24 in IOS. On our routers, interfaces are shutdown by default, so remember to
also put in the 'no shutdown' command to bring the interface up. So we do that for interface
FastEthernet0/0, and then, we also need to configure interface FastEthenet0/1
for our example. It gets IP address 192.168.1.1, subnet mask 255.255.255.0,
'no shutdown'.
After we have configured this, the router is going to be able to route traffic between those two networks.
As well as being able to route traffic,
it also gives IP connectivity to the router itself.
So after we've done this, we would be able to open up a Telnet or SSH client, like Putty, and connect
to the router to manage it.
So obviously, this is more convenient than having a walk down there with a console cable and hook it
up physically every time.
Once you've got IP addresses on your router, you'll be able to connect to those IP addresses to manage
the router remotely from wherever you are. We're also going to need an IP address on our switch to manage that
as well. A Layer 2 switch is not IP routing aware.
It does, however, support a single IP address which is used for management. So, you can't put multiple IP
addresses on a Layer 2 switch.
It will only allow you to put one IP address on there, and that's so we can again Telnet or Secure
Shell (SSH) to the switch remotely to manage it.
Unlike on a router, where we configure the IP address on an interface, on a switch, a Layer 2 switch,
the management IP address goes on a VLAN interface which is a virtual interface.
So when we configure our VLAN interface, that's called an SVI, Switched Virtual Interface,
and this is going to be in VLAN 1.
Now, I know we haven't covered VLAN's yet.
They're going to be configured in another section, for all you need to know for now is that the default
VLAN is VLAN 1, and all of our Layer 2 switch ports on a switch will be in VLAN 1 by
default.
So to get management connectivity to the switch, we configure out our management IP address on the
virtual VLAN 1 interface. That will allow us to connect to the switch from the same IP subnet
that the IP address is in,
but our administrators are probably going to be located somewhere else.
They're going to be in a different IP subnet, so this switch also needs to be able to get out to that subnet.
So just like a normal host would need,
it's also going to need to have a default gateway. Our configuration on our switch for our management IP
address, 'interface vlan 1', then we configure the IP address the same way.
So I've got IP address 192.168.0.10, subnet mask 255.255.255.0.
Now, on a router, interfaces are shut down by default. On a switch,
interfaces are enabled by default.
So there wasn't actually any need to do a 'no shutdown' here.
However, I'm just in the practice that whenever I configure an interface,
I always do a 'no shutdown' on there.
It doesn't do any harm, and it saves me having to think,
"Do I need to do a 'no shutdown' or not?"
Just always do a 'no shutdown' whenever you configure out an interface.
It saves you forgetting it. Then we exit back to global configuration mode, and to configure the default
gateway,
the command is 'ip default-gateway', for our example,
'192.168.0.1'. So that will give us IP connectivity on this switch, and we'll be able
to ping this switch now and ping out from the switch as well.
Now, I said that this IP address is for management.
We actually need to do some additional commands as well to allow Telnet and/or SSH access into the
switch.
We'll cover those in the later section, which is Securing Cisco Devices.
So, let's have a look at how to do this in the lab. For the lab
example, we've got router R1, and we're going to configure IP address 192.168.0.1
on the physical interface FastEthernet0/0.
That's going to be the default gateway address for our switch, which is SW1. SW1 is going
to be connected to the router through physical interface FastEthernet0/1, and that will
be in VLAN 1 by default. For the management IP address, we will configure that on the VLAN 1
Switched Virtual Interface. We'll give that IP address 192.168.0.10.
Once we've done that, the switch should have connectivity to 192.168.0.1
because it's on the same subnet. We want it to have connectivity to other subnets out through
the router, though. So we'll also configure the switch with an IP default gateway address of
192.168.0.1
Okay, let's have a look at this in the lab. So, I better configure the router first because it just got
a new configuration as well. So I'll go to enable on here, 'configure terminal' and let me just jump back
to the slide to check the IP address on here. Okay, so interface FastEthernet0/0, I'm going
to give that IP address 192.168.0.1.
So 'interface
FastEthernet0/0', 'ip address 192.168.0.1', a space, and then I configure the subnet
mask, which was '255.255.255.0'. Now, this is a router, so the interface is shutdown by default, so I
have to remember to do a 'no shutdown' on here. Okay, so that's the router configured. Then if I go on to
the switch, 'enable' and 'configure terminal', and let's have a look at the diagram again. This was on the
VLAN interface, 192.168.0.10. So 'interface vlan 1', and 'ip address 192.168.0.10
255.255.255.0'.
And this is not shutdown by default anyway, but it doesn't do any harm.
I'm just in the habit of always doing a 'no shutdown' whenever I configure my interface.
Okay, so now the switch should be able to communicate with the router.
Let's check that.
So I'll go back down to the enable prompt, and I'll 'ping 192.168.0.1', and good,
we've got connectivity.
That's all good.
So, I've got connectivity on my 192.168.0.0 subnet.
But I want to be able to get out to other subnets as well,
so I need to configure the default gateway. The command for that is 'ip default-gateway',
and the router was at 192.168.0.1.
Okay, so that is the initial IP connectivity configured on there. So go back to the slides again,
and I've made a note down here that this is how you configure a management IP address.
We actually have to do some additional commands to allow access via Telnet or SSH.
I'm not going to show you that here because it's covered in a later section, which is the Securing Cisco
Devices section.
But right now, I've got IP connectivity to switch, where I can do things, like do pings out from there. Okay,
next thing we want to do for the basic configuration is to configure a hostname. A descriptive hostname
makes it easier to identify the device.
For example, I could maybe call it New York-F1-Switch1.
So typically, you will specify where the Switch is, and maybe some other descriptive description on there
as well. In the lab,
I'm just going to call it hostname SW1 for Switch 1.
So let's jump back on the lab again and on my switch, notice right now,
the default hostname on a switch is just Switch.
So, that's what is showing up on the command prompt.
Now, when I enter 'hostname SW1' and hit enter.
Notice that the command prompt immediately changes to show the hostname.
This is useful because a really common mistake is to configure the wrong device by accident.
You notice on here,
I've got two different tabs open.
I've got a tab for R1 and a tab for SW1.
It's really easy when you're working from templates to paste the wrong config into the wrong command line. By
having the hostname showing up here,
It makes it a little bit less likely that you're going to do that.
So it gives you a nice description, you can see what device you're on.
Also, if you're doing troubleshooting from neighboring devices, then it will show up as its
hostname as well,
so it just makes it easy to see what's going on.
Okay, back to the slides again.
Next thing we're going to want to do is configure descriptions on our interfaces. So, interface
FastEthernet 0/1 was connected to the router,
so let's put a description on there.
Back to the command line again, I go to interface FastEthernet 0/1, and I'll say 'description
Link to R1'.
Again, this is going to be useful for troubleshooting later. If I'm doing some troubleshooting and I'm
looking at the configuration on here, I can immediately see that FastEthernet 0/1 is the
interface that's connected to router R1.